# Slide Notes

_These are notes and lack grammar even more than most things I do._

1. Hi, errbody.
2. I most definitely fit into the scaling down portion of talks today. I think scaling down is awesome because scaling down doesn’t always mean removing things, I think it can be about gaining things. A database is supposed to be accessible in various ways, it says so, in the definition here that I found — I think when you scale down a database you aren’t doing more with less, you’re doing more with more people.
3. Databases aren’t known for being the easiest — there are things that make them easier, sure, but are they worth it for a small project, or how might you work with someone else on data who doesn’t program? Hopefully you only want to build things with other developers…
4. Let’s say there is a data scale — or I say there is one, and it looks like this. There are small projects that have no data , they just have links to cat photos, maybe they even have data but it’s small and unchanging so for our purposes, it’s pretty static… Then there are projects that have a ton of data and it’s sensitive data, need for speed, relational data — they’re over on the far opposite end. But what about the space in the middle? You probably already know the answer.
5. This is where the spreadsheet lives! Spreadsheets are great for all of this middle space.
6. Spreadsheets are easy. What really ups the enabling and collaborating factor is that no one has to install this database, it’s hosted free online and it’s easy to use, the spreadsheet format is familiar to most people and it’s so easy to share. You can share it with everyone, people with the link, specific people… you know the drill.
7. The spreadsheet itself makes great databases for testing out an ideas and storing your own data, they’re great for community projects — how about tool and book lending, budgets, events or cataloguing local resources. Spreadsheets are great for collecting information, because they’re easy to share easy to use and don’t have to be installed — so don’t build a front end to another database and then get info, use a spreadsheet. The spreadsheet is your front end UI and database.
8. Ok, so spreadsheets are nifty, they hold information. Now what? That’s where sheetsee.js comes in. It’s a library I’ve been building on since my CfA fellowship in 2012. It makes it easy to work with the data from a spreadsheet and has three main parts to allow you to create maps, charts and tables of your data.
9. Sheetsee.js is broken into modules, one for each the mapping, charting and tables. This way you can build just what you need. If you want just maps, just build a version with maps. If you don’t know how or want to make it smaller, there is a full version always available on the sheetsee.js repo.
10. Sheetsee.js depends on a few other things to do what it does like handlebars for templating, MapBox.js for mapping, D3.js, jQuery and a lot of good old fashioned javascript for the tabling and data manipulating.
11. First and most importantly, Sheetsee.js depends on Tabletop.js which is a wonderful library that goes to Google and fetches your spreadsheet data and returns it in a simple, straightforward array of objects. It works with multiple spreadsheets and worksheets. And actually, all Sheetsee.js wants is an array of objects, so if you’ve got that through another means then you can still use Sheetsee.js — but all this spreadsheet stuff is cooler.
12. So, what might we build? Start with a spreadsheet. This is one for coffee shops that are great for extended hacking in. I opened the spreadsheet up to all — this is the sharing and collecting aspects I mentioned earlier — so people contributed their favorites places to hack. Now that we’ve got some data, let’s make a website.
13. This is a website using Sheetsee and that Google Spreadsheet. The website is Hack-Spots and visualizes the spreadsheet data in a few different ways with Sheetsee.js. There is so much you can do with some CSS, I think these projects are great for front end developers. I’ll talk a little bit more about some of the parts.
14. It works just like that, the spreadsheet turns it to a site.
15. But here is what’s really what’s happening — the basic set up of a project is the CSS giving everything widths and flair, then the HTML Placeholder for everything you’re going to fill up with data, the templates for how that data should be arranged and finally, the JavaScript to initialize Tabletop.js to get your data and then do all the Sheetsee.js things you want to do.
16. So in the Hack-Spots site we’ve got a map, through Sheetsee.js you can pick the map tiles and marker colors, generate geoJSON and customized the popups. You can customize the popups just like you do the other templates with Handlebars, super easy.
17. Here we’ve got a template used to display one row of data at a time — it’s a normal Handlebars template of divs and lists and styled with CSS.
18. You can also use the templating to do build out a query string — in this case, sense we have the address of the coffee shops, we can add them to the Google and Yelp URLS to create a direct link to a map or reviews.
19. Creating a table is easy, you create a div placeholder and a template and tell Sheetsee.js what the name is and it generates the table based on your template. You can make your table sortable by adding the `class=“tHeader”` to your table headers. If you want to make it searchable, add an input and tell sheet see the name of the input and the table it will be searching.  
20. And let’s not forget basic JS and Math — you can use these things to generate data about your data.
21. This site is hosted on GitHub pages, which if you didn’t know is free static site hosting for all your repos. Everything is client-side so just drop your index.html and other files onto a gh-pages branch and you’ve got a website. Every time someone hits it, they get the latest data form your spreadsheet. You can always find your repo’s site at: username.github.io/reponame.
22. What’s even cooler — and that’s why it has this green background — than free hosting is that if you create a Sheetsee.js site, put it in a repo with just a gh-pages branch, everyone who forks it can have a site, too — and when they add their spreadsheet key instead of yours they’ve got a site connected to a database they control. (and by the way all of this is possible just in GitHub.com, without Git or Text Editors)
23. So you get cool things like this — people are sharing their own data and it only took a few clicks. People still learning basic font end things can go to town on the HTML and CSS, and learn by trying without having to worry about the publishing step. For those down with JS, they can create some awesome custom interactions and visualizations.
24. So, that’s cool, but what else can you do with spreadsheets? Well, IFTT will send a ton of your actions to Google Spreadsheets. You can have a copy of all the data you’re generating and from that you can choose how to represent it. For example — Instagram
25. Pocket Reader
26. Twitter — You can create single pages, you can add these data bits as just parts of pages.
27. More! There is still more! Google Forms send their data to a spreadsheet, so you can lower the barrier even more by having people only interact with a form. This is really cool to me because I can imagine people in the field entering in data on small devices easily without having to go to the spreadsheet. And if you don’t want to depend on (or wait for) Google’s servers, tabletop.js is also on NPM (shoutout to @maxogden) so you can have your server fetch your data every so often, cache it and serve up static sites, whatever. You can also write Google App Scripts on top of your spreadsheet to automate other things like pushing versions to GitHub so that you’re data’s also Git-backed.
28. So! Scaling down is awesome because it’s bringing the barrier down and with that ore people can build, more people can contribute. People who thought they were too new to the web can hack on a site, people can be a part of putting together data whether they know anything about migrating or not. Scale down, people up.
29. THANKS!
